One, two, three, one, two, three, four.
And here I am.
We'll test it again.
This is August the 8th.
We're in the office of the dean of faculties, and I have the honor and pleasure of chatting with Dr. Janice P. Stout, S-T-O-U-T, who is professor of English.
English, yes.
And the fourth dean of faculties.
To introduce yourself, Dr. Stout, to anyone who might listen to this tape or read a transcription, summarize background, family, where I grew up, where I grew up, high school, college.
Wow.
What did mom and dad do?
Good golly, that's a big question.
I was born in Fort Worth, so I'm a native Texan.
My family, I would say, were lower middle class people.
My dad was a school teacher, although he did not go to college until, I think he finished college when I was 10 or 11 years old, first generation college, certainly.
He taught music.
He was an active musician.
He was a member of the original Light Cristo Boys
a band well known in those days.
He was also a symphony musician, however, and was classically trained.
His main instrument was viola.
I'm sorry to say that in the estate sale after they died, I let his viola go.
And it had been custom made for him and had his name in it.
But we make bad decisions sometimes.
Well, what instrument did he play for the Doughboys?
Violin.
So he was a fiddle player then?
He was a fiddle player.
Oh, okay.
He usually played second violin because if you know their style, you know they specialized in the two harmonizing fiddles.
And because he read music and indeed did the arrangements, he could...
play the harmony, whereas someone who didn't read music, and most of them didn't, could pick up a melody.
So, yeah.
I went to, yes.
I went to Polytechnic High School in Fort Worth, which the high school my father had gone to.
I neglected to mention my mother, I'm sorry to say.
She was from East Texas, from a farm family.
She had never been to high school.
gone through I think seventh grade.
So in such a situation it's possible that parents might not have cared much about education but that was not true.
It was a burning desire of hers that I would do what she had not been able to do.
So I graduated from Polytechnic High School having skipped one year along the way.
I graduated
a year ahead of the normal age.
Then to college where?
I started college at North Texas.
Unfortunately, however, I married at the age of 17.
Very foolish thing to do.
And completed only part of my college program before my young husband graduated and we started moving here and there.
having a family, so I didn't finish a bachelor's degree until 1966.
I had graduated from high school in 56.
Finished a bachelor's degree at Lamar Tech in Beaumont in 1966 as the mother of three little boys.
Finished a master's degree in 68.
Where'd you do that?
At Lamar, still.
My husband, and that's where I got the stout name,
I was transferred to Houston and I was able to enter Rice University and as the mother of four by that time and finished my doctorate in 1973.
What was your special area?
American literature.
Dissertation topic?
My dissertation topic was in 19th century American fiction.
a book called, well it became a book, called Sodom's in Eden, The City in American Fiction for 1860.
That may not be the exact title, that's close enough.
Did you join the faculty there?
No.
I've had a very peculiar professional history, which I would never recommend to anyone.
Mr. Stout was transferred here and there with Gulf Oil Company.
He had been transferred to Philadelphia while I was writing my dissertation.
I picked up teaching work at Bryn Mawr College and at Haverford College.
But only part time.
I never imagined myself as being able to go on the job market.
I had these children.
The oldest is severely handicapped.
I never felt I could do that.
And until I came to Texas A&M, I had never been a tenure track faculty member anywhere.
And I was hired here as a tenured associate professor.
All right.
Where were you immediately before coming here?
I was at Rise.
We had been transferred back to the Houston area.
And Rice had picked me up to teach for a year while someone had a Fulbright award, I think, anyway, away from campus.
So I spent like a halftime year or something at Rice.
And as the year was nearing its end and I was feeling so disheartened that
Once again, this delightful experience, as my experience at Bryn Mawry and Haverford had been.
Once again, this was coming to an end.
I talked with someone I knew there and said, what on earth can I do?
And she said, why don't you apply for that job in the graduate office?
And I did, and I was hired, and thus I became an administrator.
At Rice.
And I spent 10 years as, well, my title shifted during that time.
When I left, I was called Director of Graduate Programs at Rice.
I don't remember now.
Maybe it was coordinator when I started.
I'm not sure anyway.
Same job, just different titles.
Did you still teach a course?
And I would teach a course once a year, occasionally twice a year, which was insane.
Not for the money of it, for I wasn't paid anything for doing it more than my regular job.
but because I wanted to and because the vice president whom I reported knew that I could be more effective dealing with faculty if I had faculty status.
And indeed it made all the difference in the world, but I taught with the rank of lecturer.
I published a lot though.
And your publications in general dealt with what?
More with 20th century American fiction than with 19th, even though my dissertation had been 19th.
My first book was published in 76.
It was a rewrite of the dissertation, as you would expect.
And another book was published in 82, and I've published several books since then.
And articles and the usual stuff.
Certainly, if I had not had the publishing record, I would never have escaped the plight of the part-time faculty member.
And it is a plight.
It is, in my view, one of the shames of American higher education.
that we have more and more used people in a part-time way.
And even if we don't mean to use them in the sense of exploiting that bad meaning of the word use, even if we have the best intentions in the world, in most cases, it winds up being a virtual exploitation because it doesn't help a person build long-term.
How did you hear about the vacancy at A&M?
I had actually seen it advertised and I was feeling restless and wanting to look for other opportunities.
It was clear I would never be promoted at Rice and would never have regular faculty status because I'd come in the wrong door and I was their own student.
I mean you just aren't.
But I was not
at all planning to apply here.
And I was phoned one day by a member of the search committee here, search committee for Associate Dean of Liberal Arts, Dr. Ed Portis, who is in our political science department.
He called and said I'd been nominated, and I said I wouldn't be planning to apply.
And I think Ed could charm the socks off of anybody.
By the time we hung up, I said, well, I'll think about it.
And I sent my CV first part of the next week.
And this was the year, what year?
This must have been the spring of 87, I guess, because I came here on November 1st of 1987, and I believe it was spring when I interviewed, so it had to be.
Describe the process of the, there must have been an interview visit or something like that.
Absolutely.
By the way, I had been nominated by a woman dean at another institution.
And I think it was about in the mid-'80s when women began to realize that if they were going to rise in higher education, they were going to have to learn to nominate each other, just as men had always done.
It's the most natural thing in the world that a white male will tend to nominate a white male.
And it's not viciousness.
It's natural.
And people who are already
in underrepresented groups, one reason I think that they have trouble increasing their numbers is that if I'm asked to think of someone for a job, I will naturally think of someone with whom I share characteristics.
So it's very hard to build out of that.
At any rate, interview.
I was invited to come up for an interview, and I drove up from Houston and spent a night over at the Holiday Inn and had the usual kind of day-and-a-half interview schedule.
I will say that I came feeling very dubious that I would ever want to come to Texas A&M.
I'd grown up in Texas.
And I've told this story to others, so I don't mind telling it.
I remembered what it was like to be a female teenager going through the streets of downtown Fort Worth on a day when the Aggies were in town playing football.
And these rowdy young men in uniform coming up trying to make dates with me on the street.
And I didn't have a good impression of this place at all.
And a couple of people I'd known in high school came here when I saw them afterwards.
I didn't have a very good impression.
And so I came feeling very skeptical but thinking, oh, well, I might as well go talk to them, you know.
And I went back feeling absolutely captivated by the sense of energy on this campus, by the sense of enormous possibility
and by the sense that it was a place that was changing in ways that I thought it should change.
And I thought how wonderful it would be to go and help make good changes happen.
Now, in the interview process, did you get the impression that it was fair and that it was open?
Absolutely, yes.
I guess I'd never even put that question to myself in those terms.
So that they were open to someone from another school, from, say, Rice, and the fact that you were female was not a handicap?
No, absolutely not.
Were they deliberately looking for a woman, or were they looking for the best?
Oh, I suspect so.
You think so?
Were there any questions asked that were goofy or inappropriate?
No, I don't think so.
The dean at that time, Dan Fallon, had not been here very long, maybe a couple of years, had of course come from elsewhere, and he had big ideas for liberal arts.
He was putting together, I believe, a considerably larger associate dean staff than there had been before.
He wanted variety.
He had people who had been here a very long time who were on that dean's staff, but he wanted a variety of insights and ways of looking at the world, and I suspect that he deliberately wanted a woman.
How long was it between your interview and the time you heard a result of it?
In this case, I guess there was an offer.
Well, I think it was only a couple of, oh, you're asking me to go back a long way.
I think it was only a couple or three weeks before I heard by phone.
But it was several months before I had a formal written offer.
I had made it clear, but not until someone asked me, that I would not move unless my spouse moved.
This was no longer Mr. Stout, by the way.
This was a fellow academic.
And when I was here for the interview, someone, I guess it was the search committee chair, said, by the way, do you have a family?
And that was when I made this clear.
So they had asked for his CV.
And it takes more doing to work out two appointments.
But we were, I suppose, one of the earlier of the partner placements here.
And my husband has been quite cheerful in telling people that he was a spousal placement.
And what department did he in?
He's in civil engineering.
Civil engineering.
And he was at Rice at that time?
He had been at Rice for 20 years, ever since graduate school.
He was kind of ready for a change, too.
All right.
When you got the letter, this is the only dollar question I'll ask.
What was the beginning salary?
I think it was $50,000.
It may have been $54,000.
Did that seem to you to be an appropriate salary in the real world at that time?
Oh, yeah, and I was very pleased.
I mean, I was making a paltry sum at Rice.
This was a significant increase for me.
I did later find out that I was paid the least of any of the associate deans in the college, and I was always paid the least.
Now, you said in the college.
In the college.
You mean of liberal arts.
Right.
How many other associate deans were there?
There were three others.
And I never checked what people were paid in the other colleges.
But Dean Fallon was quite aware that, in a sense, he had rescued me from an undesirable professional situation.
And he knew I was grateful.
I'm not saying that he deliberately
But those considerations weigh into it when you think about someone's salary.
Describe the move up here and y'all getting settled in.
Righto.
We came after I had the formal offer.
We came up on a weekend.
We had an appointment with a realtor whose name had been given to me by the college.
uh she drove us around to show us neighborhoods and i think she imagined that was all we wanted to do and we said we expected to look at houses so she took us into three or four houses that day we went home feeling pretty strongly that we wanted to buy the house that we in fact live in today but we would not let ourselves do it until we came back for another weekend and
try to cool off on it, and then thinking we've been very happy the whole time.
And I presume, by comparison with Houston prices, things here seemed a little bit lower.
Yes, things did seem a little bit lower.
And there was not enormous choice, but there was certainly sufficient choice for us.
All right.
Now, as you moved and began your task, how easy was it to become part of the greater A&M faculty family?
Right.
I think the English department always was, at first, was a little uncertain about me.
They had obviously voted to hire me and voted to give me tenure, but the impetus had come from the dean.
And so I was always sort of part of the department and yet not part of the department.
I was hired as a tenured associate professor with the promise that I would come up for full the next year.
And I did come up for full the next year and was promoted.
from the word go.
Dan Fallon sort of preferred that his associate deans not teach, but I said that's who I am.
I'm on your side.
See, if I could be the emperor, I would require that everybody teach at least one course a year.
It keeps them in touch with the reality.
With the real work.
Yes.
The real work of a university is teaching and scholarship.
And I realized that at some point, you get to a place where it is counterproductive to be going and teaching.
And in fact, I have not been in the classroom since I've been dean of faculty.
But I have continued to publish and continued to work with graduate students.
But I was in the undergraduate classroom then.
It was, of course, very difficult.
Very different is what I meant to say.
I guess that's one of those Freudian things, because I said difficult.
It was very different from being at Rice because of the scale.
In the College of Liberal Arts, we had more faculty members than Rice had as a university.
And I had not done faculty affairs before.
I'd done graduate program affairs.
Here I was charged with working on our graduate programs and on faculty affairs.
I did that from day one.
What did faculty affairs, what did that mean?
All the kinds of things that the dean of faculties does.
at Texas A&M, I did in a college sense, except that the dean personally dealt with hiring and salary questions.
So I wasn't much involved in those, gradually more as years went by.
And where were we all housed at that point?
We were in Harrington Tower on the eighth floor.
I think education always felt that we were the interlopers there because that was supposed to be their building, but that's where we were at any rate.
And describe the typical routine that you, what happened on what day for the associate dean?
We had a staff meeting with the dean once a week that would last for a couple of hours.
Apart from that,
My schedule was very free-form.
I was always there by 8 o'clock.
If I ever left by 5, I don't remember it.
Subsequently, when I was stepping down, a faculty member stopped me on the sidewalk one day and said, I'm thinking about being a candidate for associate dean, but is it really true you have to be there 9 to 5?
And I said, no, that is not true.
at all, you need to be there by 7.30 or 8 at the latest, and you will never leave by 5.
I believe he was not a candidate.
An enormous paper flow.
We had
fairly defined roles, but we shared a lot.
So the issues in which an associate dean might become involved varied considerably, and that's wonderful for learning things, although it's not too great for efficiency.
I forget where I was going.
Give examples of some of the difficult matters you all had to deal with.
Well, of course, we had our component, our fair component of complaint cases.
From faculty?
From faculty or against faculty, and I would get involved with those either way.
And these would have included such topics as what?
Oh, complaint cases in the sense that my department head is not being fair to me, my faculty colleague is not treating me with appropriate collegiality, and I would try to do informal mediation.
I had been told even before I accepted the job that the dean wanted me to work on sexual harassment issues if those ever arose and to try to work proactively on educating our community about that issue.
It was, of course, then gaining legal status under EEOC quite aggressively.
The first case like that that I had to work on was with a very senior person, and it was a challenge being new kid on the block and dealing with that, but I hope I dealt with it appropriately.
I tried to do so.
Could it be, could you talk in general about the kind of issues involved in a case like that?
In a typical sexual harassment complaint, we have a lot of disguising of motivations going on.
People are usually unwilling to face what they have done.
People are usually not willing to face the fact that what we are talking about is not so much
shall we say, immorality in a traditional sense as we are talking about abuse of power.
And I think if you switch it to the abuse of power terms and can clarify that, then you can make some headway.
In general, the allegations came from what kind of a student?
A graduate student in this case.
Graduate students are statistically at greatest risk of sexual harassment, as you may know.
I mean, national study after national study.
They were the accused.
The accusing.
Oh, accusing.
Okay.
Graduate students, of course, are in a position of dual jeopardy.
And male accusing male or what?
Female accusing male is overwhelmingly the typical case, and that is true nationally as it is here.
And faculty members are always very quick to say, oh, but what about the false accusation, which would obviously be devastating and which can happen.
But which is very rare, whereas unfortunately, the actual case is not all that rare.
Thank heaven it doesn't happen every day.
I don't mean that.
But the false accusation, I have only had in my years here one case where I was quite certain I was dealing with a false accusation.
And this student was demonstrably ill.
And in terms of the seriousness, did, were any of these serious enough to lead to potential termination of the accused?
I dealt with one case where the person was found guilty of sexual harassment.
The president's letter, and in those days, the president was required to write the letter under our policies, said, if you are ever again accused and found guilty, you will be terminated.
And this was, I mean, this is awful to have to deal with, yeah.
As the associate dean, were you the one to do the investigation, or was there usually a committee doing it for you?
There was usually a committee, and that would bring a recommendation to me, and I would then have to add my recommendation to it.
Normally, did you find it appropriate to agree with the committee's recommendation?
Do you know, I think I've just told you the wrong thing.
Our policy now requires it that way.
But I think I was reading backwards.
I believe at that time those things would get charged to me, and I did the investigation.
So I take that back.
But then, yes, I had to make a recommendation.
And the person who was censured by the president that I mentioned earlier, I believe never forgave me for that.
But in fact, this person was accused again.
And I had to investigate again.
And that second one, if I had come in with a recommendation of guilty,
he would probably have been fired.
But I really believed in the second case that there was a misunderstanding.
Did you ever get any midnight phone calls, any harassment phone calls?
Never.
Never have.
Never have, okay.
No threats?
No.
Did anyone in any real or self-selected position of authority
ever tell you what decision to reach in advance?
Never.
Never, no one ever tried to.
And in terms of your total workload, about what percentage of time was required for this kind of matter?
Oh, in terms of worry and care and grief, of course enormous, but in terms of time,
Oh, my word, never more than 5%.
I would say less than that.
What did you spend most of your time on?
Routine paper flow, plucking forth from the flow the things that needed attention.
Attending meetings, I'm sorry to say.
Because I wanted to and felt it was important, I spent time tracking the representation of women and minorities in the college.
and comparative salaries in the college.
This is not something I had to do.
The dean always allowed me a lot of latitude on what I thought I should do, and I thought I should do that.
What were your findings where people of similar background and experience were compared?
All right, women are always paid less.
They were and they are.